Mark, the question, what operations were you
involved in that were successes? One time we were
flying, and our airplane was very distinct. You
could recognize it in the air, no problem. And our
call sign was a provider. Because that's what we
did, we provided. They said, provider, we got a
call on emergency frequency. They said,
provider, flying over. They gave the name of the
base. They said, would you, we have a... a request,
could you land? Because I have a request to make of
you. And are you on a mission that you can't land or
could you come down? And I said, yes, we can land.
Because I don't mean to imply that I was
belligerent or I didn't respond to orders or
anything. But my orders were to fly a particular
mission. But I did deviate. And I didn't hesitate
to deviate. And in some cases, as I think most
pilots will tell you, most of us use the old trick of
if we didn't want to hear what they were telling us
we would come back and say i'm sorry your
transmission was garbled i can't read you you know
the radio is breaking up and this particular time i
did do what my order said not to do i landed at a
forward base i shouldn't have landed at but when i
landed it was a marine base and they said are you
going to saigon i said no i'm not but i can't go to
saigon Fan Rang was on the coast, not inland.
Saigon was inland. And Saigon had the only
mortuary in country. I said, well, we have a young
Marine who was killed three days ago, and we need to
get his body to the mortuary in Saigon. The young
Marine's body had been in a body bag for three days.
And it had one plane fly over. And when they told
them what they wanted, they refused to land, which
really, as a, you could see how it really affected
them. So when they asked us to land, they didn't
tell us what they wanted. And we said, yes, we'll
take the body back. We opened the cargo. the ramp,
put the body in the back and strapped it down. Then
we opened the windows in front of the airplane and
all sat in the front of the airplane to fly back. You
couldn't stand to be close to that body. And as we
took off, they lined the runway as we took off. And
we made one pass back through, and they all saluted
and waved as we left, which made the whole... It
wasn't a mission that was planned. It wasn't a
mission that... that would mean anything to
anybody except to those men and to us. And it was one
of the most gratifying things that we did. And we
got to Saigon, of course. There was a call for me to
call the commander. And I called the commander.
And he gave me as much of a reprimand as he could but
understood what we had done. So it was nothing to
get in trouble over. But the other people had
followed their orders to a T. They had not landed.
They had not transported the body. But that was a
very satisfying thing to do. So in what you're
saying, there are times within war that you've got
to deviate from your orders or you have to deviate
from certain things because circumstances do not
always allow you to follow to the letter of the law.
That's another point. We fought the war. not as a
war, as a police action. And we didn't fight it
under wartime rules. We fought under peacetime
rules. As a safety officer, my first six months in
country, I was supposed to enforce safety rules. I
was supposed to go around to the squadrons and
watch them fly and tell them how to fly safe. And
never could I figure out how you fly safely when
someone is shooting at you. I flew with the 310th
Air Commando Wing. I flew with the 12th Air
Commando Wing. The 12th was the defoliant. that
dropped the agent on the trees that killed the
leaves so that you could see what was underneath
them. Those people flew 100 foot above the ground.
They flew at 10 to 15 feet above the treetops.
There's nothing safe about that. There's no
regulation in the military code that says you can
fly that low and that slow over treetops. And they
literally were just hedgehogging all the time.
When I flew with them, they wore very, very heavy
flight jackets, and their airplanes were
shielded underneath, but they were still not
protected from ground fire. They would take a hit
in the front of the airplane that could cause an
airplane crash, and they knew this all the time. If
I, as a safety officer, wanted to be safe and not get
killed, I would tell them to fly much higher. But
then they can't fly higher because the foliant
would not hit the areas it's supposed to hit. It
would kill the trees. It would also kill the rice.
If you kill the crops that the South Vietnamese
were growing, you've done more damage than if you
didn't do anything at all. So to tell those people
to fly safely, to be a safety officer, was not easy.
I had to tell them to park their airplanes a certain
distance apart, the wingtips to be a certain
distance apart. But in many cases, they didn't
have enough room to park the airplanes. They had to
overlap the wings, overlap whatever they could to
park them. You just couldn't draw peacetime lines
on the ramp. And yet, the safety people from
Seventh Air Force on down expected reports that
would go up, just like a peacetime operation, if it
was anything but a peacetime operation. There's
one particular operation that I can tell you
about, and it's the time that you landed and didn't
crack an egg. Oh. Not one egg. Well, that's what we
did. The C-123, the tires on C-123 were large.
mainly because the assault landings would make.
You'd actually assault the ground when you hit
because you were coming down right on stall speed.
You hit the ground, chop the power, and stop almost
immediately. We could land and take off in less
than 2,000 feet. Now, that sounds like a lot to the
average person, but consider that the airports
that you're used to flying from are miles long,
miles and miles and miles, like at Bergstrom.
Bergstrom, the runway, is 150 feet wide, and it's
two miles long, or longer. And it's just that long.
But we were landing in like 2,000 feet, which is
less than a half mile. So when you take off and land
that much, your tires take a lot of abuse. And we
took off on one, and all the tread on the tire, on one
tire, completely peeled off. The tire was down
to... just the basic tire itself, almost like a
tube. And I had on board at the time, it was one of
those missions where we were doing the Vietnamese
a favor by transporting important people from one
place to another. I had the Vietnamese family on
board. I had two cows, chickens, all their crops,
and everything that they owned on board the
airplane. And various and sundry places on the
airplane. We had to land. When we landed, it was
back on a foamed runway. And I landed. And I did not
land normally where you'd have the power way back.
I landed what we call hot. I landed fairly fast
because I didn't want the airplane to stall just
above the runway or on final approach. And with all
these things on board, I think we even had a goat on
board, if I remember correctly. And there was a
wire basket with eggs in it that was sitting on the
floor. And the crew on the plane was the pilot, the
co-pilot. They would have a load master. And the
load master was up front. And his challenge, he
says, Captain, if you can land without breaking
those eggs, he says, I'll declare that this is the
greatest flight I've ever been on. And the key
thing, of course, was to land safely. We expected
the tire to blow out when we hit. The tire didn't
blow out. We landed safely. Didn't break an egg.
And the write-up in the paper, of course, talked
about the chickens and the cows and the people. Our
main concern, of course, was to save the airplane,
which we did. We changed the tire, continued the
mission. Everything was OK. Of course, what
everybody remembers is I didn't break any eggs.
Were you ever involved in any classified
missions? There were, yes, several classified
missions. And most of them are not unclassified to
my knowledge as yet. But there is one that was
classified, highly classified. That was the most
enjoyable mission I had that I'm sure is
unclassified now. One of the most, a lot of secrets
in Vietnam didn't stay secret because it would be
published in the Stars and Stripes. And the
Vietnamese would take what we threw away in our
trash cans home with them and put it together. And
the Stars and Stripes normally would tell troop
movements, a lot of things that should have been
continued to be classified. But the one thing that
was very classified was the movement of Bob Hope.
And the year I was over there, came over. And he had
two people with him that I will never forget, one
being Raquel Welch, for obvious reasons, the
other being Barbara McNair. And we were assigned
as they flew mostly in C-130s, which were larger
aircraft than C-121. I mean, they flew in C-131s
rather than our aircraft. But we flew some support
people around. We flew some of their equipment
around. And where we were going was highly
classified. And no one knew, because it would have
been a pretty big coup for the Vietnamese to have
captured, killed, or hurt some of these troops
coming over. And
we knew where they were going each day. And the one
day that they were going to be at Pham Rang, was the
day that I really tried to get back in time for the
show. Because that was the central point for
people to congregate to see the show. And we had
maybe 4,000 or 5,000 people there to see the show.
And that one, I was flying their equipment back.
And my mission said, don't even mention where
you're going. But fortunately, I was going back to
my home base. I knew they were going to be there. So
it was very satisfying to have a mission
completed. Well, that was the time when I was late
getting to the show. And one of the people that
worked with me had saved a seat for me. And I was
right on the stage. Very satisfying. What
operations or missions were you involved in that
you would consider failures? Well, most of the
missions I flew, I had the opportunity to change
them. If they were, quote, failing, I could do
something about it and had the opportunity to.
Now, that wasn't true of everyone. Some people,
like the one I mentioned, if they were flying the
wrong things into a base, they didn't have the
opportunity to change it. I did. I went so far as to
literally disobey orders to go over someone's
head to change it, and did. And that was simply
because I had come in at a wing staff position, had
gotten to know the people at the top, and the rank
that I could throw around helped me in flying the
missions. If I had not been separated from my
family, and if we hadn't been participating in it,
area where one night you might have supper with
someone and eat a hamburger with them and be
talking to them, and next night they'd be dead. If
that hadn't been happening, it would have been the
best flying assignment I ever had. It was very
satisfying. It was very enjoyable flying. It was
just, it was kind of like when you have a family
reunion and you all get together because someone
has died. It's nice to get together, but you hate
the occasion. I enjoyed the flying. I just wasn't
under good circumstances. What was your view of
the ARVN? Well, I didn't have a lot of contact with
them, and most of the views I could express would be
what someone else said. They seemed to be... It
would depend on individual units. Some units
functioned very well, were good counterparts.
Other units seemed to be do-nothing units. So it
depended on who you were working with. I worked
with very good units. So I have a very high opinion
of those folks, of the ranger groups that we had in
Vietnam, the Green Berets, the Special Forces.
All those folks were... I worked with very good
ones. What was your view of the Vietnamese people
as a whole?
There were... Just like if you walked in inner city
New York or inner city Chicago, you're going to
find people who are doing things different than
they do at Gladewater or College Station or
wherever. In Saigon itself, you can find every
kind of vice, every kind of person that you wanted
to find. There are very good people who deserved a
better life than what they have now under a
communist reign. There are very good people who
deserve to have better than a group of people like
the American GI coming in with nothing on his mind
but to have a girl and a drink. They were very good
people who wanted a life of their own but couldn't
have it because of the French the Americans, the
North Vietnamese, the Communist regime, because
of graft and corruption within their own people.
It was not, in the hotel that we were in, there was a
little cafe across the street, and we would go over
there and not eat anything, but I would drink Coke.
I thought Coke was pretty safe. I thought that
until one night one of the guys found a, a screw in
his Coke bottle. It was jingling as he drank it, and
we realized it must have been homemade. It tastes
like Coke, but that kind of gave us second thoughts
about drinking Coke. But when you're sitting
there on an unusual off, or a motorcycle, or drive
up, and a young man jump off of them and come in and
say, my little sister, my little sister, for, or
how much they thought they could get for her little
sister. And when they're peddling their little
sister, And they wouldn't go up to the Vietnamese
thing to say, just to the Americans. And the
Americans responded readily. They made a lot of
money off of Americans through prostitution that
wouldn't have been there otherwise. But there
were a lot of good people, just like in the States.
There were a lot of good people. A lot took
advantage of who was there. The people out that
were working for a living, the farmers, They were
looking to stay alive. Survival. How did you view
the enemy? Did you have a personal view? Do you have
a strong hatred for the enemy? Did you understand
the enemy's purpose and your own purpose? How did
you view the enemy as a whole? Well, that's like...
Like the enemy was hard to really put a handle on, if
you will. The enemy was this force that was trying
to take over this country. The enemy wasn't that
guy or that guy. And the enemy really wasn't those
guys in black pajamas that were coming down this
trail and infiltrating. That didn't seem to be the
enemy. The enemy was some larger force out here.
And that enemy moving down through Vietnam,
moving down through Cambodia, that enemy taking
over was, it was like cancer. It was like if you
don't do something about it, it's going to spread
rampant. And that was how I, you didn't, the
immediate enemy, like when the camp was overrun
and they were shooting us, that was the immediate
enemy. But that wasn't the enemy that people
looked at. You got yourself in more of a gunfight or
a survival situation. But as I looked at it, and I
think as most people I'm associated with looked at
it as, we're trying to stop communism spreading to
this part of the world. And sometimes you'd be very
upset because you seem to be more concerned about
it than the people in the country were. Sometimes
they were trying to just live their normal life.
Just let me open my restaurant today and serve
food. I don't care if I serve it to the Americans,
the French, or the Italians, or the Vietnamese, or
the Vietcong, just let me serve my food and make a
living. You think, no, you should be just serving
us because we're here to save you. And we were not
really, not
really that, we didn't go in there to find out about
the Vietnamese. I didn't learn any Vietnamese. In
fact, my My only two words that I ever knew were stop
and rat poison, and stop because I was riding my
motorcycle, and rat poison because they put rat
poison out and wanted to keep the kids from eating
it.
Vietnam was not like any other place around. You
could see an enemy all around you. You saw an enemy
when you realized that the people living in the
cardboard box when the monsoons came were going to
be out of a home. It was just a tear right on them. You
could see an enemy in one particular day. We were
down by the Saigon River, which looked like where
they dumped all the sewage, and it flowed
somewhere. And it was little kids asleep on a
bench. And at the time, I had a two-year-old and a
three-year-old that I wasn't going to see until
they were three and four years old. This little kid
was about four, and I was going to go over and look at
the little kid. And it was asleep, kind of curled up
on the bench. And as I walked over to look at him, I
leaned over to look at it. And its ear, there was
completely green pus that completely filled the
kid's ear. And it just sickened me to know that
there was another enemy there, an enemy that
wasn't letting them take care of their kids the way
they wanted to. I guess they wanted to. But they
couldn't take care of them. They didn't have the
medical facilities or the care to take care of
them. So there were a lot of enemies, if you will.
Not just I could take this guy in black pajamas and
he was the enemy. What about your views on
selective service?
You'll have to consider I'm, what, 52, 53. I don't
know how old I am. But
when I was growing up, The draft was in effect. And a
lot of ways that Americans saw to take care of some
problems was to send someone to go in the Army. And
they'd say, quote, that will straighten him out. I
didn't understand what that meant at the time. But
later on, I began to realize, and especially now I
realize, that when an individual doesn't receive
discipline at home, the parents or whoever waits
for that discipline to come. The military had the
discipline that some individuals needed. And you
would hear a comment, the military really
straightened him out. What the military has done
for a lot of individuals was to give them
responsibility, teach them the discipline, and
literally make good citizens out of them. I think
selective service was the greatest thing that we
had for people who didn't know what direction they
wanted to go. It was a good starting point to learn
how to live with other people and to learn a trade,
if you will. This will get off the subject a little
bit, but the Air Force itself is the largest
business in the world. And the Air Force can train
you to do more things in civilian life than
anything else. It really is. So I think selective
service was indeed a good program. What about your
views about the National Guardsmen during
Vietnam? Do you feel that they should have been
called over to serve in Vietnam or expected to
serve in Vietnam? Expected to serve is a good word,
not called over to serve. I felt all the time that we
had plenty of people in Vietnam. We had plenty of
equipment in Vietnam. We had plenty of know-how in
Vietnam. We did not use it to its full potential. We
did not fight a war as we know how to fight a war. If we
had not dropped the atomic bomb in Japan, we may
still be fighting the Japanese. We never took that
kind of action in Vietnam.
All right, the next question that I'd like to ask
you is how you felt about the one year tour of duty
that was initiated in Vietnam.
I found that to be the biggest restriction to
really getting anything done. Because when you
arrive in country, you would spend two to three
months learning your job. And then you could spend
six months doing your job and then spend two to
three months getting ready to come home as you knew
when you were coming home as opposed to the to the
world war one or world war two when the troops were
sent overseas they were told you're going you'll
come home when the war is over i knew exactly when i
left the states when my war would be over my
personal war would end on february the second and
i'd be on my way back home and that was that's what
made the war seem like a like a business, like we
were, like a nine to five war, that we were, you knew
exactly when your tour of duty would be over and
when you'd be coming back. All right. Do you think
that we could have won the war if politics would
have allowed or if the tour of duties would have
been longer? The tactics we used would have given
us a a different outcome. To say won or lost is
probably not a good thing to say. If winning the war
meant that we could have maintained the freedom
for the South Vietnamese, freedom from
communism, then yes, we could have won the war. We
could have prevented the infiltration into the
South if we had used the weaponry that we had at our
disposal. We did not use it. And whether we didn't
use it for politics, whether we didn't use it
because of military strategy, Whether the
military decided not to use it or whether the
civilians decided not to use it, I don't know. But
we did not use the weaponry we had to prevent the
infiltration and to prevent the spread of
communism into South Vietnam. We could have
prevented that, in my opinion, had we chosen to.
Instead of hitting the Ho Chi Minh Trail, at
different spots, we could have stopped it at the
source in Hanoi and even farther towards, you
know, into Vietnam. Where were you during the Tet
Offensive? In the Tet Offensive, I was stationed
at Phan Rang, flying 123s. And during the first
night of the Tet Offensive, we were not aware that
it was going on as it was. It started During the
night, we got up next morning and started flying
regular missions. And those regular missions
were in the middle of the Tet Offensive. And my
first flight into the... I was flying into
DeLotte. And DeLotte was one of the places that was
overrun. And I realized then that we were in the
middle of an action larger than normal. And as
radio contact became established with Saigon via
HF radio, we knew that we were having... the large
offensive that had been predicted. And I was
diverted to fly ammo into one of the northern spots
near Da Nang. And in doing so, one
of the missions I flew in, my crew and aircraft were
specifically ordered back to Phan Rang. And I
found out later that they had pulled all of us out
who had a short time to go. I was within the last week
of coming home Actually, the last two weeks of
coming home during the Tet Offensive. And they
pulled me out of there to go back to Phan Rang, not to
fly any more missions during the combat. All
right. This leads me to my next question. Before
you went to Vietnam, while you were there, and when
you returned, do you think that the media was
playing a large role in the Vietnam conflict,
especially since your tour ended so close... to
the Tet Offensive. When you came home, I'm sure the
press was quite vivid in their description to
Vietnam. Yes, it was. Before going to Vietnam, I,
like a lot of other people, were 10,000 miles away
from the action and didn't know that much about it
and really didn't bother to find out that much
about it. When I received my orders to go to
Southeast Asia, I became very interested in what
was happening, as did my immediate family. While I
was in Vietnam, the news media, as they told the
story about Vietnam, sometimes it very much
offended me because sometimes it was not the whole
truth. It was just part of the truth. Sometimes it
was not even true at all. Sometimes the
speculation just gets the story. And if you read
just what was published about Vietnam, You didn't
get to know the people. You didn't get to know the
circumstances. You didn't know why things were
done. And the frustrating thing was you couldn't
do anything about it. You couldn't go on the news
the next night and say, now, wait a minute. This
happened this way or this happened that way. And in
one instance, one of the squadrons that was
stationed in the north had occasion to fly. They
were on a reconnaissance mission to fly over
Hanoi. And during their reconnaissance mission,
they were constantly dodging the surface-to-air
missiles. And in this one particular flight, they
retaliated against a surface-to-air missile
site on the ground, even though they had
instructions not to. And they knocked the site
out. And by knocking, they had pictures. Their
camera showed that they hit only the site and
knocked the site out completely. But the news
media picked up on it. and reported that they had
knocked out a hospital and a school and a lot of
school children were injured and so forth and so on
the reports that we had through intelligence were
that they had only hit the sam site nothing else but
the paper really played it up as a as killing a lot of
civilians and if our if our intelligence was
correct and i have no reason to believe it wasn't
then that story was not true. It was later
confirmed by Jane Vonda that indeed a hospital had
been bombed and that didn't sit too well either. So
you do feel that the media played a large role. Do
you feel like that the times that the media used to
show what was happening in Vietnam during the
evening meal when everyone sat down to watch the
news. Do you think that bringing the war home was a
mistake and that that is what turned the American
public against Vietnam? I'm really not sure why
they were against Vietnam. I felt a lot of people
were against it because we weren't fighting it
like a war. We were fighting on Like we were in
Vietnam, we were fighting a ground war when we were
actually more prepared to fight an air war. And the
media itself showed things that would
make you, would change your opinion one way or the
other on the spot. For instance, the picture of the
individual who was shot in the head. That's a
famous picture that has been shown millions of
times. And if you were against the war and didn't
know what the war was all about and didn't care, you
would suddenly have feelings and say, I don't like
these people that just step up to someone with a gun
and shoot them in the head. You immediately would
be for whatever you were doing. And then most
people would say, go ahead, kill all of them. But
who are you killing? What were you killing? What
were you trying to do? Most people were not aware of
try to stop the spread of communism. You don't stop
the spread of communism by killing that guy who
showed no mercy for the fellow on television. So
anger and the media would sway people, sometimes
rightly or wrongly, with what they showed. So you
feel like the media did show things out of context?
Yeah, and probably not on purpose sometimes.
Sometimes that's all they had to show. Sometimes
they were not told the full story because it was
either classified or no one was available to tell
them the full story. And some of the things that
were later came out with Lieutenant Calley were
indeed